# Retrospective

Despite not finishing this project and despite not having worked on this project for over a month now, I feel I have learned some valuables lessons about game and software development. Lessons that I would not have learned if I hadn't had the opportunity to work on my own project.

The first point I learned is that planning is very valuable. I am somewhat of an overplanner; I need to adress every little detail in my world-building project before I feel I can move on to the next part. Planning has often caused me to lag behind in the important matters of my projects, and even caused me to burn out well before completion or viability of the project.

So I tried winging it this time, planning the next part as I went along and only ever planning as much as I needed for what was directly ahead. I feel this was not a wholly good approach. Many times I had to stop progressing to refactor code because I hadn't planned for parts to be that large or accessed that much or any number of reason. I am not averse to change when it makes sense, but there were stages at which advancing the project wouldn't make sense with the current architecture or even code I initially tested the project on. Had I created a UML diagram to start (or some similar high-level plan), I feel I would've had a better understanding of the project as a whole, which would have improved my outlook on even the refactors that would've happened.

Another thing that planning ahead would've helped with is character and monster abilities. Player classes, races, abilities, items, etc. were all put in their own little Python file at the start, and each of them grew to a size where I felt it was too late to refactor to the proper solution: configuration files and ability dictionaries. I'm not gonna say I wondered why games like World of Warcraft or The Elder Scrolls had numerical (or alphanumerical) IDs for every single thing in the game, but I understand why they do now. My code would've been cleaner and improved if I had used YAML or any other format to configure items and abilities. This is a pattern I need to remember.

Foolishly, my code wasn't created around asynchronicity in the beginning. Which I realised in these later parts of the project that I would need async to run combat and still process inputs in an acceptable manner. Planning may not have solved that part early as this was a very late realization and I haven't really worked with async until now.

I feel I was a little too focused on UI/UX in the early parts of the project. I didn't know if my *vision***™** of what the project would look like in its finished state was possible at all when I started, and I ended up overly focused on the visual aspects. This is not the core of a game and I feel should not be touched on first. Rather than progressing from UI -> Save System -> UI -> Game State -> UI -> Combat -> etc. as I did, I should've started with the combat, with the async nature of the project, with the meatiest part. This is also a pattern I need to remember.

I wish I could've played more with the install/launch script and made more robust and multiplatform. I wish I could've gone more in-depth about items and character stats. I wish I could've put some work into game balance. And I didn't lack for time to put into these things. On the contrary, I spent way too much time working on this than I should've. Part of that time waste was me being a very junior programmer and not knowing what I was doing. This comes back to the planning issue again.

But part of it also came down to real life. My cat died partway through development. This wasn't some tear-jerking event on my end, but it was greatly depressing. So I took a day off. Then, I took another day off. And another one. And so on until I felt I needed to do something again. Then we got a new cat. I had to spend more time aclimating this scardy cat to his new life. Eventually, I got used to not working on this project. I got used to a new routine. It was easy because I hadn't been working on this project for that long. Now that it's been months, I can't work up the effort to work on this specific thing again. I need to rebuild my habit of working on code by going back to the lessons. But to do that, I also needed to write this piece and get closure.
